1 Basics
1.1 Placement
The rooks go on the corner squares. Place the knights next to the rooks. Put the bishops on the board next to the knights. After the bishops come the queens. The queens always start on the square of the same shade, the white queen starts on a light square, and the black queen starts on a dark square. Place the kings next to the queens, which is only fitting. Add the pawns straight across the rank in front of the other pieces.
1.2 Moves
The king moves one square in any direction. The king also has a special move called castling that involves also moving a rook.
A rook can move any number of squares along a rank or file, but cannot leap over other pieces. Along with the king, a rook is involved during the king's castling move.
A bishop can move any number of squares diagonally, but cannot leap over other pieces.
The queen combines the power of a rook and bishop and can move any number of squares along a rank, file, or diagonal, but cannot leap over other pieces.
A knight moves to any of the closest squares that are not on the same rank, file, or diagonal. (Thus the move forms an "L"-shape: two squares vertically and one square horizontally, or
two squares horizontally and one square vertically.) The knight is the only piece that can leap over other pieces.
A pawn can move forward to the unoccupied square immediately in front of it on the same file, or on its first move it can advance two squares along the same file, provided both squares
are unoccupied (black dots in the diagram); or the pawn can capture an opponent's piece on a square diagonally in front of it on an adjacent file, by moving to that square (black "x"s).
A pawn has two special moves: the en passant capture and promotion.
2 Advanced tips
2.1 Opening
A chess opening is the group of initial moves of a game (the "opening moves"). Recognized sequences of opening moves are
referred to as openings and have been given names such as the Ruy Lopez or Sicilian Defence. They are catalogued in
reference works such as the Encyclopaedia of Chess Openings. It is recommended for anyone but the chessmasters that when
left with a choice to either invent a new variation or follow a standard opening, choose the latter.
2.2 Middlegame
The middlegame is the part of the game when most pieces have been developed. Because the opening theory has ended, players
have to assess the position, to form plans based on the features of the positions, and at the same time to take into account
the tactical possibilities in the position.
2.3 Endgame
The endgame (or end game or ending) is the stage of the game when there are few pieces left on the board. There are three main strategic differences between earlier stages of the game and endgame:
During the endgame, pawns become more important; endgames often revolve around attempting to promote a pawn by advancing it
to the eighth rank.
The king, which must be protected in the middlegame owing to the threat of checkmate, becomes a strong piece in the endgame
and it is often brought to the center of the board where it can protect its own pawns, attack the pawns of opposite color,
and hinder movement of the opponent's king
Zugzwang, a disadvantage because the player has to make a move, is often a factor in endgames and rarely in other stages of
the game. For example, in the adjacent diagram, Black on move must go 1...Kb7 and allow white to queen after 2.Kd7, while
White on move must allow a draw either after 1.Kc6 stalemate or losing the last pawn by going anywhere else.